README.md, before:

# The IUCN Red List Index

The International Union for Conservation of Nature’s Red List of Threatened Species (www.iucnredlist.org) has evolved to become the world’s most comprehensive information source on the global conservation status of animal, fungi and plant species. It's a critical indicator of the health of the world’s biodiversity.

The Red List Index (RLI) measures trends over time in the overall extinction risk of species, as measured by their category of extinction risk on the IUCN Red List.

Trends reflect shifts among categories owing solely to genuine improvement or deterioration in status (i.e. excluding category revisions owing to improved knowledge or revised taxonomy).

A Red List Index value of 1.0 equates to all species being categorised as Least Concern, and hence that none are expected to go extinct in the near future. An RLI value of zero indicates that all species have gone Extinct. (Butchart et al., 2010)


## Methodology

The methodology used in this package follows the approach described by Butchart et al. (2004) [https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rstb.2004.1583; https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.0020383], with subsequent updates as outlined in Butchart et al. (2007) [https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0000140].

The RLIs for each taxonomic group for each year are modeled to take into account various sources of uncertainty: 

(i) Data Deficiency: Red List categories (from Least Concern to Extinct) are assigned to all
Data Deficient species, with a probability proportional to the number of species in non-Data
Deficient categories for that taxonomic group. 

The Python code in this repository is based on R scripts originally developed by BirdLife International: https://github.com/BirdLifeInternational/rli-codes.

## Installation

## Running the Global Red List Index Calculation Script

To calculate Red List Index values over time for each comprehensive group using a CSV file, run the included `calculate_global_rli.py` script from your terminal. 

You must provide an input CSV file containing the following columns ([example](https://github.com/IUCN-UK/red-list-index/blob/main/tests/fixtures/species_red_list_category_list.csv)):

*id:* The species identifier. Must be an integer with no null values.

*red_list_category:* The conservation status. Must be a non-null string and one of the following values: LC, NT, VU, EN, CR, RE, CR(PE), CR(PEW), EW, EX, or DD.

*year:* The year. Must be an integer with no null values.

*group:* The comprehensive group. Must be a non-null string.


The `calculate_global_rli.py` script allows you to compute the Global Red List Index (RLI) from your input data in CSV format. This script processes your species data and outputs the calculated RLI values to a specified CSV file.

### Basic Usage

To run the script, use the following command:

```bash
uv run calculate_global_rli.py <input_csv> <output_csv>
```

- `<input_csv>`: Path to your input CSV file with species data (refer to the documentation above for the required format).
- `<output_csv>`: Path where the output CSV with RLI results will be saved.

### Optional Arguments

- `-h`, `--help`: Show the help message and exit.
- `--number_of_repetitions NUMBER_OF_REPETITIONS`: Specify the number of repetitions for the calculation (default is 1000).
- `--plot`: Save output plot as PNG.
- `--verbose`: Enable verbose logging.
- `--version`: Show version number and exit.

### Example

```bash
uv run calculate_global_rli.py species_data.csv rli_output.csv --number_of_repetitions 500
```

This command will calculate the Global Red List Index using the data from `species_data.csv`, save the results to `rli_output.csv`, and perform 500 repetitions of the calculation to acount for resampling of Data Deficient (DD) rows.  The script displays output upon the completion of each stage (see example below).

For example, running this for the `species_red_list_category_list.csv` file found in the test fixtures directory:
```
➜  red-list-index git:(update-classes) uv run calculate_global_rli.py ./tests/fixtures/species_red_list_category_list.csv output.csv --number_of_repetitions 1000 --plot
INFO: Processing and validating dataframe for: ./tests/fixtures/species_red_list_category_list.csv
INFO: Building Global Red List Index DataFrame (repetitions: 1000)
INFO: Interpolating RLI for missing years
INFO: Extrapolating RLI to extend years
INFO: Aggregated RLI
INFO: Saved results to: output.csv
INFO: Saved plot to: output.png
```

## Standalone RLI calculator use

The `red_list_index` package also supports calculating the Red List Index for a single custom set of weights.

To get started, open a Python REPL using a tool like `uv`:

```bash
uv run python
```

Then, initialize the package and perform a Red List Index calculation:

```python
>>> import red_list_index
>>> from red_list_index.calculate import Calculate
>>> calculate = Calculate([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])
>>> calculate.red_list_index()
0.4
```

## FAIR4RS Principles Statement

This package is developed in alignment with the [FAIR4RS principles](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41597-022-01710-x) ([FAIR Principles for Research Software](https://doi.org/10.15497/RDA00068)), aiming to make the software Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable for both humans and machines.

If you have any questions, suggestions, or notice anything we have missed in implementing these principles, please [open an issue or discussion on GitHub](https://github.com/IUCN-UK/red-list-index/issues).

## Development

Run tests with 
```
uv run pytest
```

Run the Ruff formatter on all directories and files
```
uv run ruff format
```

Run Ruff check
```
uv run ruff check
```


A note on the test fixture data available [here](https://github.com/IUCN-UK/red-list-index/blob/main/tests/fixtures/species_red_list_category_list.csv):
This sample dataset covers Amphibians (8011 records per year), Birds (11197 records per year), Corals (846 records per year), Cycads (341 records per year) and Mammals (5803 records per year) and was used in the 2023 Red List Index (RLI) calculations.
Comprehensive Red List assessments for these groups can be found at www.iucnredlist.org.

```
┌───────────┬──────┬───────┬────────┬─────┐
│ group     ┆ year ┆ total ┆ non_dd ┆ dd  │
│ ---       ┆ ---  ┆ ---   ┆ ---    ┆ --- │
│ str       ┆ i64  ┆ u32   ┆ u32    ┆ u32 │
╞═══════════╪══════╪═══════╪════════╪═════╡
│ Amphibian ┆ 1980 ┆ 8011  ┆ 7102   ┆ 909 │
│ Amphibian ┆ 2004 ┆ 8011  ┆ 7102   ┆ 909 │
│ Amphibian ┆ 2022 ┆ 8011  ┆ 7102   ┆ 909 │
│ Bird      ┆ 1988 ┆ 11197 ┆ 11157  ┆ 40  │
│ Bird      ┆ 1994 ┆ 11197 ┆ 11157  ┆ 40  │
│ Bird      ┆ 2000 ┆ 11197 ┆ 11157  ┆ 40  │
│ Bird      ┆ 2004 ┆ 11197 ┆ 11157  ┆ 40  │
│ Bird      ┆ 2008 ┆ 11197 ┆ 11157  ┆ 40  │
│ Bird      ┆ 2012 ┆ 11197 ┆ 11157  ┆ 40  │
│ Bird      ┆ 2016 ┆ 11197 ┆ 11157  ┆ 40  │
│ Bird      ┆ 2020 ┆ 11197 ┆ 11157  ┆ 40  │
│ Bird      ┆ 2024 ┆ 11197 ┆ 11157  ┆ 40  │
│ Coral     ┆ 1996 ┆ 846   ┆ 704    ┆ 142 │
│ Coral     ┆ 2008 ┆ 846   ┆ 704    ┆ 142 │
│ Cycad     ┆ 2003 ┆ 341   ┆ 338    ┆ 3   │
│ Cycad     ┆ 2014 ┆ 341   ┆ 338    ┆ 3   │
│ Mammal    ┆ 1996 ┆ 5803  ┆ 4944   ┆ 859 │
│ Mammal    ┆ 2008 ┆ 5803  ┆ 4944   ┆ 859 │
└───────────┴──────┴───────┴────────┴─────┘
```

Commit message:

Add ty Python type checker (#43)

README.md, after:

# The IUCN Red List Index

The International Union for Conservation of Nature’s Red List of Threatened Species (www.iucnredlist.org) has evolved to become the world’s most comprehensive information source on the global conservation status of animal, fungi and plant species. It's a critical indicator of the health of the world’s biodiversity.

The Red List Index (RLI) measures trends over time in the overall extinction risk of species, as measured by their category of extinction risk on the IUCN Red List.

Trends reflect shifts among categories owing solely to genuine improvement or deterioration in status (i.e. excluding category revisions owing to improved knowledge or revised taxonomy).

A Red List Index value of 1.0 equates to all species being categorised as Least Concern, and hence that none are expected to go extinct in the near future. An RLI value of zero indicates that all species have gone Extinct. (Butchart et al., 2010)


## Methodology

The methodology used in this package follows the approach described by Butchart et al. (2004) [https://royalsocietypublishing.org/doi/10.1098/rstb.2004.1583; https://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.0020383], with subsequent updates as outlined in Butchart et al. (2007) [https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0000140].

The RLIs for each taxonomic group for each year are modeled to take into account various sources of uncertainty: 

(i) Data Deficiency: Red List categories (from Least Concern to Extinct) are assigned to all
Data Deficient species, with a probability proportional to the number of species in non-Data
Deficient categories for that taxonomic group. 

The Python code in this repository is based on R scripts originally developed by BirdLife International: https://github.com/BirdLifeInternational/rli-codes.

## Installation

## Running the Global Red List Index Calculation Script

To calculate Red List Index values over time for each comprehensive group using a CSV file, run the included `calculate_global_rli.py` script from your terminal. 

You must provide an input CSV file containing the following columns ([example](https://github.com/IUCN-UK/red-list-index/blob/main/tests/fixtures/species_red_list_category_list.csv)):

*id:* The species identifier. Must be an integer with no null values.

*red_list_category:* The conservation status. Must be a non-null string and one of the following values: LC, NT, VU, EN, CR, RE, CR(PE), CR(PEW), EW, EX, or DD.

*year:* The year. Must be an integer with no null values.

*group:* The comprehensive group. Must be a non-null string.


The `calculate_global_rli.py` script allows you to compute the Global Red List Index (RLI) from your input data in CSV format. This script processes your species data and outputs the calculated RLI values to a specified CSV file.

### Basic Usage

To run the script, use the following command:

```bash
uv run calculate_global_rli.py <input_csv> <output_csv>
```

- `<input_csv>`: Path to your input CSV file with species data (refer to the documentation above for the required format).
- `<output_csv>`: Path where the output CSV with RLI results will be saved.

### Optional Arguments

- `-h`, `--help`: Show the help message and exit.
- `--number_of_repetitions NUMBER_OF_REPETITIONS`: Specify the number of repetitions for the calculation (default is 1000).
- `--plot`: Save output plot as PNG.
- `--verbose`: Enable verbose logging.
- `--version`: Show version number and exit.

### Example

```bash
uv run calculate_global_rli.py species_data.csv rli_output.csv --number_of_repetitions 500
```

This command will calculate the Global Red List Index using the data from `species_data.csv`, save the results to `rli_output.csv`, and perform 500 repetitions of the calculation to acount for resampling of Data Deficient (DD) rows.  The script displays output upon the completion of each stage (see example below).

For example, running this for the `species_red_list_category_list.csv` file found in the test fixtures directory:
```
➜  red-list-index git:(update-classes) uv run calculate_global_rli.py ./tests/fixtures/species_red_list_category_list.csv output.csv --number_of_repetitions 1000 --plot
INFO: Processing and validating dataframe for: ./tests/fixtures/species_red_list_category_list.csv
INFO: Building Global Red List Index DataFrame (repetitions: 1000)
INFO: Interpolating RLI for missing years
INFO: Extrapolating RLI to extend years
INFO: Aggregated RLI
INFO: Saved results to: output.csv
INFO: Saved plot to: output.png
```

## Standalone RLI calculator use

The `red_list_index` package also supports calculating the Red List Index for a single custom set of weights.

To get started, open a Python REPL using a tool like `uv`:

```bash
uv run python
```

Then, initialize the package and perform a Red List Index calculation:

```python
>>> import red_list_index
>>> from red_list_index.calculate import Calculate
>>> calculate = Calculate([1, 2, 3, 4, 5])
>>> calculate.red_list_index()
0.4
```

## FAIR4RS Principles Statement

This package is developed in alignment with the [FAIR4RS principles](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41597-022-01710-x) ([FAIR Principles for Research Software](https://doi.org/10.15497/RDA00068)), aiming to make the software Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable for both humans and machines.

If you have any questions, suggestions, or notice anything we have missed in implementing these principles, please [open an issue or discussion on GitHub](https://github.com/IUCN-UK/red-list-index/issues).

## Development

Run tests with 
```
uv run pytest
```

Run the Ruff linter and code formatter on all directories and files
```
uv run ruff format
```

Run Ruff check
```
uv run ruff check
```

Run the ty Python type checker on all directories and files
```
uv run ty check
```


A note on the test fixture data available [here](https://github.com/IUCN-UK/red-list-index/blob/main/tests/fixtures/species_red_list_category_list.csv):
This sample dataset covers Amphibians (8011 records per year), Birds (11197 records per year), Corals (846 records per year), Cycads (341 records per year) and Mammals (5803 records per year) and was used in the 2023 Red List Index (RLI) calculations.
Comprehensive Red List assessments for these groups can be found at www.iucnredlist.org.

```
┌───────────┬──────┬───────┬────────┬─────┐
│ group     ┆ year ┆ total ┆ non_dd ┆ dd  │
│ ---       ┆ ---  ┆ ---   ┆ ---    ┆ --- │
│ str       ┆ i64  ┆ u32   ┆ u32    ┆ u32 │
╞═══════════╪══════╪═══════╪════════╪═════╡
│ Amphibian ┆ 1980 ┆ 8011  ┆ 7102   ┆ 909 │
│ Amphibian ┆ 2004 ┆ 8011  ┆ 7102   ┆ 909 │
│ Amphibian ┆ 2022 ┆ 8011  ┆ 7102   ┆ 909 │
│ Bird      ┆ 1988 ┆ 11197 ┆ 11157  ┆ 40  │
│ Bird      ┆ 1994 ┆ 11197 ┆ 11157  ┆ 40  │
│ Bird      ┆ 2000 ┆ 11197 ┆ 11157  ┆ 40  │
│ Bird      ┆ 2004 ┆ 11197 ┆ 11157  ┆ 40  │
│ Bird      ┆ 2008 ┆ 11197 ┆ 11157  ┆ 40  │
│ Bird      ┆ 2012 ┆ 11197 ┆ 11157  ┆ 40  │
│ Bird      ┆ 2016 ┆ 11197 ┆ 11157  ┆ 40  │
│ Bird      ┆ 2020 ┆ 11197 ┆ 11157  ┆ 40  │
│ Bird      ┆ 2024 ┆ 11197 ┆ 11157  ┆ 40  │
│ Coral     ┆ 1996 ┆ 846   ┆ 704    ┆ 142 │
│ Coral     ┆ 2008 ┆ 846   ┆ 704    ┆ 142 │
│ Cycad     ┆ 2003 ┆ 341   ┆ 338    ┆ 3   │
│ Cycad     ┆ 2014 ┆ 341   ┆ 338    ┆ 3   │
│ Mammal    ┆ 1996 ┆ 5803  ┆ 4944   ┆ 859 │
│ Mammal    ┆ 2008 ┆ 5803  ┆ 4944   ┆ 859 │
└───────────┴──────┴───────┴────────┴─────┘
```
